chore(blog): websocket series part 1 (#213)
asyncapi/website: pages/blog/websocket-part1.md

date: 2021-04-09T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - websocket
cover: /img/posts/websocket-part1/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Lukasz Gornicki
    photo: /img/avatars/lpgornicki.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/derberq
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Community Guardian
excerpt: Websocket is a protocol, an industry standard for building client applications that users love to use. What AsyncAPI has to do with it?
featured: true
---

It is a pretty subjective post. I share my perspective, taking into account years of experience building backend and frontend with user experience in mind. 

>  Everything we hear is an opinion, not a fact. Everything we see is a perspective, not the truth.
― [Marcus Aurelius](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2019/sep/26/viral-image/no-marcus-aurelius-didnt-say-about-opinions-and-fa/)

This blog post is the first one about Websocket, but there will be more. I'm working on a series of blog posts about WebSocket.

## What is WebSocket

It is a pretty old protocol used for duplex communication over TCP connection. It was standardized in 2011. Yes, ten years ago means it is old, super old. 

> So why are we even mention it in 2021? 

Reviewer: Shouldn't it be "So why are we even mentioning it in 2021?" ?

Author: how about `So why do we even mention it in 2021?` ?

---

> title: WebSocket, Shrek, AsyncAPI - An Opinionated Intro

Reviewer 2: What about this?

```suggestion
title: WebSocket, Shrek, and AsyncAPI - An Opinionated Intro
```

date: 2021-04-09T06:00:00+01:00
type: Communication
tags:
  - websocket
cover: /img/posts/websocket-part1/cover.webp
authors:
  - name: Lukasz Gornicki
    photo: /img/avatars/lpgornicki.webp
    link: https://twitter.com/derberq
    byline: AsyncAPI Maintainer and Community Guardian

> excerpt: Websocket is a protocol, an industry standard for building client applications that users love to use. What AsyncAPI has to do with it?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
excerpt: WebSocket is a protocol, an industry standard for building client applications that users love to use. What does AsyncAPI have to do with it?
```

featured: true
---

> It is a pretty subjective post. I share my perspective, taking into account years of experience building backend and frontend with user experience in mind. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a pretty subjective post. I'm sharing my perspective, taking into account years of experience building backend and frontend with user experience in mind. 
```

>  Everything we hear is an opinion, not a fact. Everything we see is a perspective, not the truth.
― [Marcus Aurelius](https://www.politifact.com/factchecks/2019/sep/26/viral-image/no-marcus-aurelius-didnt-say-about-opinions-and-fa/)

> This blog post is the first one about Websocket, but there will be more. I'm working on a series of blog posts about WebSocket.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This blog post is the first of a series of blog posts about WebSocket I'm working on.
```

## What is WebSocket

It is a pretty old protocol used for duplex communication over TCP connection. It was standardized in 2011. Yes, ten years ago means it is old, super old. 

So why do I even mention it in 2021? 

> It is very widely adopted and will not go away anytime soon because tooling support is excellent and serves its purpose well. Just remind yourself when HTTP/2 showed up and how many years it took everyone to migrate, and it would not happen if not a strong support and push from all the big players. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is very widely adopted and will not go away anytime soon because tooling support is excellent and serves its purpose well. Just remind yourself when HTTP/2 showed up and how many years it took everyone to migrate. It would not happen without the strong support and push from all the big players. 
```

> Sure, there is [HTTP/2 multiplexing](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/http2/#request_and_response_multiplexing) and protocols like [Mercure](https://mercure.rocks/docs/mercure) or [GraphQL Subscription](https://spec.graphql.org/June2018/#sec-Subscription). There is also [RFC8441](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8441) for Websocket and HTTP/2 and tooling already adopts it, like [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/http/upgrades) or [Jetty](https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/issues/3537). Nevertheless, WebSocket is not going anywhere.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sure, there is [HTTP/2 multiplexing](https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/performance/http2/#request_and_response_multiplexing) and protocols like [Mercure](https://mercure.rocks/docs/mercure) or [GraphQL Subscription](https://spec.graphql.org/June2018/#sec-Subscription). There is also [RFC8441](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8441) for WebSocket and HTTP/2 and some tools already adopted it, like [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/intro/arch_overview/http/upgrades) or [Jetty](https://github.com/eclipse/jetty.project/issues/3537). Nevertheless, WebSocket is here to stay.
```

> WebSocket is not going anywhere

This can also sound like it has no future 😄

> Anyway, the future of Websocket has nothing to do with this post. This post is for the AsyncAPI community looking into the AsyncAPI spec because of WebSockets now, no matter the protocol's future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anyway, the future of WebSocket has nothing to do with this post. This post is for the AsyncAPI community looking into the AsyncAPI spec because of WebSockets now, no matter the protocol's future.
```

## Websocket use case

- Do you like to see in Slack that someone is typing a response? 

> - Do you like when a user interface updates without page refresh?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Do you like it when a user interface updates without page refresh?
```

- Do you like it when your client app knows there are updates available for display?

> That is what WebSocket is for. You establish a connection between client and server, a long-living connection. Through such a connection, the client can send a stream of messages to the server, and this is possible the other way around at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That is what WebSocket is for. You establish a long-living connection between client and server. Through such a connection, the client can send a stream of messages to the server, and this is possible the other way around at the same time.
```

> One could say: _I don't need WebSocket to achieve that. I could just set up a data pulling with REST API. Just ask the API every few seconds if there are updates._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One could say: _I don't need WebSocket to achieve that. I could just set up a data polling with REST API. Just ask the API every few seconds if there are updates._
```

Sadly this is not a joke. Engineers do it. Some engineers just take shortcuts, mostly because deadlines hunt them down.

> HTTP pulling was presented very well in Shrek's famous _Are we there yet?_ scene.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
HTTP polling was presented very well in Shrek's famous _Are we there yet?_ scene.
```

<YouTube id="basofea2UEs" />

> Don't go that path. Do not perform unnecessary connections to your servers and create more and more traffic with more and more resource consumption. Wasting resources is bad and makes Shrek angry. Websocket change a lot there:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Don't go that path. Do not perform unnecessary connections to your servers and create more and more traffic with more and more resource consumption. Wasting resources is bad and makes Shrek angry. WebSocket changes a lot there:
```

- Want to generate a server or/and a client? If not for final production use, then for sure for prototyping and testing.

These are just a few common needs. For WebSocket, you only establish a connection over HTTP protocol, and the rest goes over WS, so OpenAPI specification won't help you much here. WebSocket is one of the patterns in event-based systems. In the end, it is all about a stream of messages and asynchronous processing. Yes, it would be best to use AsyncAPI :smiley:

## WebSocket described with AsyncAPI

When I google for some public WebSocket API to play with, I find mostly currency trading products:
- [Kraken WebSocket API](https://docs.kraken.com/websockets/)
- [Gemini WebSocket API](https://docs.gemini.com/websocket-api/)
- [CEXIO Websocket API](https://cex.io/websocket-api)

Currency trading is a topic I know nothing about :man_shrugging: but it feels interesting to explore more. Documentation of the 1st and 2nd API looks familiar from look&feel perspective. I think we can make a bet they are already using AsyncAPI, and Kraken most probably is still running on version 1. Let's release the Kraken then.

> > I'm sorry if you expected me to describe with AsyncAPI Shrek's interface. It would be fun, but only fun, and I'd also like to teach you something.

Reviewer 2: > with AsyncAPI Shrek's interface

What does it mean?

Author: changed sentence a bit

I will write an AsyncAPI document for Kraken API after playing with the API and basing it on the [current documentation](https://docs.kraken.com/websockets/).

### Playing with WebSocket API

> The best way to play with API is through CLI. Who didn't hear about **curl** in the REST API world? For WebSocket, I would recommend **websocat**. Kraken's API is partially public without authorization which is just great because to play with it, you do not have to set up an account to get an authorization token.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to play with a WebSocket API is through a CLI. Who didn't hear about **curl** in the REST API world? For WebSocket, I would recommend **websocat**. Kraken's API is partially public without authorization which is just great because to play with it, you do not have to set up an account to get an authorization token.
```

> 1. Install **websocat**. For other installation options, check [this](https://github.com/vi/websocat#installation) list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install **websocat**. For other installation options, check out [this](https://github.com/vi/websocat#installation) list.
```

Now you know how to interact with the Kraken API. Now let's try to describe it using AsyncAPI.

### Describing API using AsyncAPI

I'll explain, in detail, how to describe Websocket API with AsyncAPI in another blog post that will be part of the series. Why? I don't want to make this post super lengthy and discourage others from reading it. Let us learn step by step. 

For now, I will throw here a full AsyncAPI document I created for the Kraken API. You can also open it up in the [AsyncAPI Playground](https://playground.asyncapi.io?url=https://gist.githubusercontent.com/derberg/4e419d6ff5870c7c3f5f443e8bd30535/raw/53b8c1af10ce474a54c96f7dd15d9a6f18448504/asyncapi-websocket-kraken.yml) and compare with their [current documentation](https://docs.kraken.com/websockets/)

Familiarize with below before you look at the AsyncAPI document:
- AsyncAPI describes the API interface between the client and the server. In other words, the AsyncAPI document is for the user of the API. It does not describe what the server does but what the user can do with the API.

> - Kraken API is quite complex. It has some beta servers, some private messages, and messages closely related to vocabulary specific for currency trading. I dropped all of those from my research not to overcomplicate things. In other words, the AsyncAPI file that you can see below is not and a complete document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Kraken API is quite complex. It has some beta servers, some private messages, and messages closely related to vocabulary specific for currency trading. I dropped all of those from my research not to overcomplicate things. In other words, the AsyncAPI file that you can see below is not a complete document.
```
